---
layout: post
title:  "Analog Codes"
date:   2021-02-01 11:13:17 +0100
categories: Film
bibliography: /Users/markusmaicher/Zotero/Meine Bibliothek.bib
permalink: /blog/:categories/:title
---

In this article I want to investigate some questions concerning the nature of the analog and the digital from the perspective of film. The question of ontological difference between analog and digital media has been the subject of discussions among scholars for decades and I don't intend to neither give a comprehensive overview of this discussion nor propose a solution to this problem. However, I would like to provide a bit of insight in the subject from the perspective of artistic research and media archaeology. Instead of holding on to the dichotomy and reinforcing it I will look interesting intersections and convergences between the two, especially in the realm of film.

## Analog vs. Digital

As mentioned there is a rich discussion about the difference between the analog and the digital, so I will just highlight a few ontological considerations. Generally the analog is considered to be continuous whereas the digital is considered to be discontinuous. If we look at sound, an analog signal consists of a wave with a certain frequency and amplitude, whereas the frequency determines the pitch of the sound and the amplitude the loudness. These waves are generated by vibrations that set the air in motion. Let's look a film sound and specifically at the operation of transforming an image of sound as such. In a married print, which is a print that is made of an image track and a soundtrack that runs synchronous, the soundtrack is printed as an image, a waveform next to the images. In the process of recording sound, air vibrations are converted into electroacoustic signals, which are then printed on sound stock[^soundstock] as a visual representation. This representation must then be converted back into sound during the projection. In the projector the waveform on the film is projected by a sound lamp onto a photo cell, which a light signal that varies according to the frequency and amplitude. This signal is then converted into an electrical signal by the photo cell and sent to the sound processor. The electrical signal is then amplified via amplifiers and sent to the speakers in the cinema hall, where we can then hear the sound. As you can see, there is a double transformation at play: first from vibrations into images and then again from images into vibrations. The interesting aspect of this double process is its continuous character, that is to say that sound is read continuously in the recorder and the projector. It is not read frame by frame, or section by section, but as a continuous flow. Images on the other hand a read sequentially or discontinuously. What you see on the screen are 24 single frames per second. The individual frames are visible only for a fraction of the frames per second, namely around 1/48 of a second. The other 1/48 of a second the image is blocked by a shutter and transported until the next image is fixed in the aperture plate. So what we see in the cinema is light / no light, or image / no image. One could argue here, following Lev Manovich[@manovich2002], that cinema is already digital. Digital in the sense of discontinuous information. 

The sequence of images may be discontinuous, but an important aspect of digital information is its binary nature. Is cinema binary? The intuitive answer to this questions is: probably not. Even though the projector operates with the modulation of light and darkness, the information printed on film is not binary, but continuous. Whereas digital images are made of discrete picutre elements, in short pixels, analog film is made of grain. If we take the simpler example of black and white film, we know if light hits the surface of film, the emulsion, small sliver halogens form a little grain of silver, which are then processed in a chemical developer to full sized silver particles. This is the grain of the film. The more light sensitive the film is, or in other words the faster the film, the grainer it will be because of larger silver particles. These particles are not fixed in a grid, they rather distribute themselves quite randomly on a microscopic level. This is why we speak of the dance of the grain in analog film, which contributes to its unique sensory quality. In digital video pixels are distributed in a grid, there is no element of chance, and each pixel has the same size and aspect ratio (usually square). Nothing is dancing on the screen, everything is exact and evenly laid out. Thus, in analog film the analog wave of light hits the emulsion and distributes itsself continuously on the surface and is absorbed by this light sensitive surface. The chemical reaction with the developer then brings about the latent image into a manifest, continuous image. In digital film light is transcoded [@fossati2018] into binary information which then is translated into hexadecimal color values for the pixels. Silvia Fossati calls the analog process "transcription" and the digital process "transcoding": "While an analog (photography) 'transcribes before it represents' (2007: 78), a digital system in the first place “transcodes” (Rodowick, 2007 after Lev Manovich, 2001). Indeed, a digital system makes use of a numeric code (discrete elements, such as the steps in a staircase), for transcoding sound and light waves." [@fossati2018: 26]

The information, however, is not encoded. Which brings us to another aspect of the digital/analog dichotomy - isomorphism.

[^soundstock]: Film stock for sound has a very high contrast, which is better suited to represent waveforms

## References
